.TH waveinfo 7 "2023-11-09" "Jamie Hardt" "Miscellaneous Information Manuals"
.SH NAME 
wavinfo \- WAVE file metadata
.SH SYNOPSIS
Everything you ever wanted to know about WAVE metadata but were afraid to ask. 
.SH DESCRIPTION 
.PP
The WAVE file format is forwards-compatible. Apart from audio data, it can 
hold arbitrary blocks of bytes which clients can elect to ignore unless they 
recognize them and know how to read them.
.PP
Without saying too much about the structure and parsing of WAVE files 
themselves \- a subject beyond the scope of this document \- WAVE files are 
divided into segments or 
.BR chunks ,
which a client parser can either read or skip without reading. Chunks have 
an identifier, or signature: a four-character-code that tells a client what
kind of chunk it is, and a length. Based on this information, a client can look
at the identifier and decide if it knows how to read a chunk and if it wants
to. If it doesn't, it can simply read the length and skip past it.
.PP
Some chunks are mandated by the Microsoft standard, specifically
.I fmt 
and
.I data
in the case of PCM-encoded WAVE files. Other chunks, like 
.I cue
or
.IR bext ,
are optional, and optional chunks usually hold metadata. 
.PP
Chunks can also nest inside other chunks, a special four-cc 
.I LIST 
is used to indicate these. A WAVE file is a recursive list: a top level 
list of chunks, where chunks may contain a list of chunks themselves.
.SS Order and Arrangement of Metadata Chunks in a WAVE File
.PP
Chunks in a WAVE file can appear in any order, and a capable parser can accept
them appearing in any order. However, authorities give guidance on where chunks
should be placed when creating a new WAVE file.
.PP
.IP 1)
Every authority agrees that the 
.I fmt
chunk must precede the data chunk.
.IP 2)
For all new WAVE files, clients should always place an empty chunk, a
so-called
.I JUNK
chunk, in the first position in the top-level list of a WAVE file, and
it should be sized large enough to hold a 
.I ds64
chunk record. This will allow clients to upgrade the file to a RF64
WAVE file 
.BR in-place ,
without having to re-write the file or audio data.
.IP 3)
Older sources recommend placing metadata before the audio data, so clients
reading the file sequentially will hit it before having to seek through the
audio. This may improve metadata read performance on certain architectures.
.IP 4)
Older authorities also recommend inserting 
.I JUNK
before the 
.I data 
chunk, sized so that the first byte of the
.I data
payload lands immediately at 0x1000 (4096), because this was a common factor of
the page boundaries of many operating systems and architectures. This may
optimize the audio I/O performance in certain situations. 
.IP 5)
Modern implementations (we're looking at 
.B Pro Tools
here) tend to place the Broadcast-WAVE
.I bext
metadata before the data, followed by the data itself, and then other data
after that.
.\" .PP
.\" Clients reading WAVE files should be tolerant and accept any configuration of
.\" chunks, and should accept any file as long as the obligatory
.\" .I fmt
.\" and 
.\" .I data
.\" chunks
.\" are present. 
.PP
It's not unheard-of to see a naive implementor expect 
.B only
.I fmt 
and 
.I data 
chunks, in this order, and to hard-code the offsets of the short
.I fmt
chunk and 
.I data
chunk into their program. This is something that should always be checked when
evaluating a new tool, just to make sure the developer didn't do this. Many
coding examples and WAVE file explainers from the 90s and early aughts give the
basic layout of a WAVE file, and naive implementations go along with it.
.SS Encoding and Decoding Text Metadata
.\" .PP
.\" Modern metadata systems, anything developed since the late aughts, will defer
.\" encoding to an XML parser, so when dealing with
.\" .I ixml 
.\" or
.\" .I axml
.\" so a client can mostly ignore this problem.
.\" .PP
.\" The most established metadata systems are older than this though, and so the
.\" entire weight of text encoding history falls upon the client.
.\" .PP
.\" The original WAVE specification, a part of the Microsoft/IBM Multimedia
.\" interface of 1991, was written at a time when Windows was an ascendant and
.\" soon-to-be dominant desktop environment. Audio files were almost 
.\" never shared via LANs or the Internet or any other way. When audio files were
.\" shared, among the miniscule number of people who did this, it was via BBS or
.\" Usenet. Users at this time may have ripped them from CDs, but the cost of hard
.\" drives and low quality of compressed formats at the time made this little more
.\" than a curiosity. There was no CDBaby or CDDB to download and populate metadata
.\" from at this time.
.\" .PP
.\" So, the 
.\" .I INFO
.\" and 
.\" .I cue
.\" metadata systems, which are by far the most prevalent and supported, were
.\" published two years before the so-called "Endless September" of 1993 when the
.\" Internet became mainstream, when Unicode was still a twinkle in the eye, and
.\" two years before Ariana Grande was born.   
.PP
The safest assumption (and Microsoft's mandate) is that all text metadata, by 
default, be encoded in 
.B Windows codepage 819, 
a.k.a. ISO Latin alphabet 1, or ISO 8859-1. This covers most Western European
scripts but excludes all of Asia, Russia, most of the European Near East, the
Middle East.
.PP 
To account for this, Microsoft proposed a few conventions, none of which have 
been adopted with any consistency among clients of the WAVE file standard.
.IP 1)
The RIFF standard defines a 
.I cset 
chunk which declares a Windows codepage for character encoding, along with a 
native country code, language and dialect, which clients can use for
determining text encoding, date, time and numeric formats, and so on. We have
never seen a WAVE file with a 
.I cest 
chunk.
.IP 2)
Certain RIFF chunks allow the writer to override the default encoding.
Relevant to audio files are the 
.I ltxt 
chunk, which encodes a country, language, dialect and codepage selection 
along with a time range text note. We have never seen the text field on one 
of these filled-out either, clients we've see use 
.IR labl " and " note 
chunks for text annotations, exclusively.
.PP 
Some clients, in our experience, simply write UTF-8 into 
.IR cue ,
.IR labl ,
and
.I note 
fields without any kind of framing.
.PP 
A practical solution is to assume either ISO Latin 1, Windows CP 859 or 
.BR "Windows CP 1252" , 
and allow the client or user to override this based on its own inferences. The 
.I chardet 
python package may provide useable guesses for unknonw text encoding, YMMV.
.PP 
More modern metadata systems for WAVE files, like 
.BR ADM " or " iXML ,
are based on XML and so defer encoding to the XML parser. 
.B Broadcast-WAVE 
text metadata is spec'd by the EBU to be encoded in 7-bit ASCII, but you can
count on clients to probably write UTF-8 or Latin 1, depending on its
complexity and vintage and other factors.
.SH CHUNK MENAGERIE
A list of chunks that you may find in a wave file from our experience.
.SS Essential WAV Chunks 
.IP fmt 
Defines the format of the audio in the 
.I data 
chunk: the audio codec, the sample rate, bit depth, channel count, block
alignment and other data. May take an "extended" form, with additional data
(such as channel speaker assignments) if there are more than two channels in
the file or if it is a compressed format.
.IP data 
The audio data itself. PCM audio data is always stored as interleaved samples.
Individual audio samples are stored little-endian, and if there are more than
one channels the samples for each channel are stored together as an array. An
array of simultaneous samples is a 
.B frame
and the length of the frame (in bytes) is known as the 
.BR "block alignmnent" 
of the audio data. With perhaps the exception of mono 8-bit PCM WAVEs, block 
alignments of WAVE files are required to be multiples of 2. This has some 
implications for oddball encodings, like stereo 20-bit PCM which can (and in 
some obscure codecs, is) stored in five-byte blocks.
.SS Optional WAVE Chunks
.IP JUNK 
A region of the file not currently in use. Clients sometimes add these before
the 
.I data
chunk in order to align the beginning of the audio data with a memory page 
boundary (this can make memory-mapped reads from a wave file a little more 
efficient). A 
.I JUNK 
chunk is often placed at the beginning of a WAVE file to reserve space for 
a 
.I ds64 
chunk that will be written to the file at the end of recording, in the event 
that after the file is finalized, it exceeds the RIFF size limit. Thus a WAVE 
file can be upgraded in-place to an RF64 without re-writing the audio data.
.IP fact 
Fact chunks record the number of samples in the decoded audio stream. It's only
present in WAVE files that contain compressed audio.
.IP "LIST or list"
(Both have been seen) Not a chunk type itself but signals to a RIFF parser that 
this chunk contains chunks itself. A LIST chunk's payload will begin with a 
four-character code identifying the form of the list, and is then followed
by chunks of the standard key-length-data form, which may themselves be 
LISTs that themselves contain child chunks. WAVE files don't tend to have a 
very deep heirarchy of chunks, compared to AVI files.
.SS RIFF Metadata 
The RIFF container format defines a metadata system common to all RIFF files, 
WAVE being the most common at present, AVI being another very common format
historically.
.IP "LIST form INFO"
A flat list of chunks, each containing text metadata. The role
of the string, like "Artist", "Composer", "Comment", "Engineer" etc. are given
by the four-character code: "Artist" is 
.IR IART , 
Composer is 
.IR ICMP , 
engineer is 
.IR IENG , 
Comment is 
.IR ICMT ,
etc.
.IP cue
A binary list of cues, which are timed points within the audio data. One caveat
to cues is that they are 32-bit integers, like most of the other numeric fields
in WAVE files, which implies cues may not be able to address every frame in an 
RF64 file. In that case, 
.I iXML 
also can hold timed notes, that might be the best alternative.
.IP "LIST form adtl"
Contains text labels 
.RI ( labl )
for the cues in the 
.I cue 
chunk, "notes" 
.RI ( note ,
which are structurally identical to 
.I labl 
but hosts tend to use notes for longer text), and "length text"
.I ltxt 
metadata records, which can give a cue a length, making it a range, and a text 
field that defines its own encoding.
.IP cset
Defines the character set for all text fields in 
.IR INFO ,  
.I adtl 
and other RIFF-defined text fields. By default, all of the text in RIFF 
metadata fields is Windows Latin 1/ISO 8859-1, though as time passes many 
clients have simply taken to sticking UTF-8 into these fields. The 
.I cset 
cannot represent UTF-8 as a valid option for text encoding, it only speaks 
Windows codepages, and we've never seen one in a WAVE file in any event, and 
it's unlikely an audio app would recognize one if it saw it.
.SS Broadcast-WAVE Metadata
Broadcast-WAVE is a set of extensions to WAVE files to facilitate media 
production maintained by the EBU.
.IP bext
A multi-field structure containing mostly fixed-width text data capturing
essential production information: a 256 byte ASCII free description field,
32 byte originator name and a unique reference, recording date and time, a 
frame-based timestamp for sample-accurate recording time, and a coding history 
record. The extended form of the structure can hold a SMPTE UMID (a kind of 
UUID, which may also contain timestamp and geolocation data) and pre-computed 
program loudness measurements. 
.IP peak
A binary data structure containing the peak envelope for the audio data, for 
use by clients to generate a waveform overview.
.SS Audio Definition Model Metadata
Audio Definition Model (ADM) metadata is a metadata standard for audio 
broadcast and distribution maintained by the ITU.
.IP chna
A binary list that associates individual channels in the file to entities
in the ADM XML document stored in the 
.I axml 
chunk. A 
.I chna 
chunk will always appear with an 
.I axml
chunk and vice versa.
.IP axml
Contains an XML document with Audio Definition Model metadata. ADM metadata 
describes the program the WAVE file belongs to, role, channel assignment,
and encoding properties of individual channels in the WAVE file, and if the 
WAVE file contains object-based audio, it will also give all of the positioning
and panning automation envelopes.
.IP bxml 
This is defined by the ITU as a gzip-compressed version of the 
.I axml 
chunk.
.IP sxml 
This is a hybrid binary/gzip-compressed-XML chunk that associates ADM 
documents with timed ranges of a WAVE file.
.SS Recorder Metadata
.IP iXML 
An XML document in the Gallery Software iXML standard. iXML is designed
specifically for recording on-set slate information, like scene and take,
project title, select / alt / NG status, and textual channel descriptions,
among some other things. iXML also tracks "families" and "UIDs" of WAVE files 
that a recorder client can use to associate mutiple WAVE files into one 
recording; before RF64 some production recorders would break long recordings
at the size limit, create a new WAVE that continues the recording, and then 
link them in the same family as contiguious. Non-interleaved multi-channel
recordings could also be assciated with each other in this way.
.SS Dolby Metadata
Dolby metadata is present in Dolby Atmos master ADM WAVE files.
.IP dbmd 
Records hints for Dolby playback applications for downmixing, level 
normalization and other things.
.SS Proprietary Chunks 
.IP ovwf 
.B (Pro Tools)
Pre-computed waveform overview data.
.IP regn 
.B (Pro Tools)
Region and cue point metadata.
.SS Chunks of Unknown Purpose
.IP elm1 
.IP minf 
.IP umid
.SH REFERENCES
(Note: We're not including URLs in this list, the title and standard number 
should be sufficient to find almost all of these documents. The ITU, EBU and 
IETF standards documents are freely-available.)
.SS Essential File Format
.TP  
.B Multimedia Programming Interface and Data Specifications 1.0. Microsoft Corporation, 1991.
The original definition of the 
.I RIFF 
container, the 
.I WAVE 
form, the original metadata facilites (like 
.IR INFO " and " cue ),
and things like language, country and
dialect enumerations. This document also contains descriptions of certain
variations on the WAVE, such as 
.I LIST wavl
and compressed WAVE files that are so rare in practice as to be virtually
non-existent.
.TP 
.B ITU Recommendation BS.2088-1-2019 \- Long-form file format for the international exchange of audio programme mterials with metadata. ITU 2019.
Formalized the RF64 file format, ADM carrier chunks like 
.IR axml 
and 
.IR chna .
Formally supercedes the previous standard for RF64, 
.BR "EBU 3306 v1" .
One oddity with this standard is it defines the file header for an extended 
WAVE file to be 
.IR BW64 ,
but this is never seen in practice.
.TP 
.B RFC 2361 \- WAVE and AVI Codec Registries. IETF Network Working Group, 1998.
Gives an exhaustive list of all of the codecs that Microsoft had assigned to
vendor WAVE files as of 1998. At the time, numerous hardware vendors, sound
card and chip manufacturers, sound software developers and others all provided
their own slightly-different adaptive PCM codecs, linear predictive compression
codes, DCTs and other things, and Microsoft would issue these vendors WAVE
codec magic numbers. Almost all of these are no longer in use, the only ones
one ever encounters in the modern era are integer PCM (0x01), floating-point
PCM (0x03) and the extended format marker (0xFFFFFFFF). There are over a
hundred codecs assigned, however, a roll-call of failed software and hardware
brands.
.SS Broadcast WAVE Format
.TP 
.B EBU Tech 3285 \- Specification of the Broadcast Wave Format (BWF). EBU, 2011.
Defines the elements of a Broadcast WAVE file, the 
.I bext 
metadata chunk structure, allowed sample formats and other things. Over the 
years the EBU has published numerous supplements covering extensions to the 
format, such as embedding SMPTE UMIDs, pre-calculated loudness data (EBU Tech 
3285 v2), 
.I peak 
waveform overview data (Suppl. 3), ADM metadata (Suppl. 5 and 7), Dolby master 
metadata (Suppl. 6), and other things.
.TP 
.B SMPTE 330M-2011 \- Unique Material Identifier. SMPTE, 2011.
Describes the format of the SMPTE UMID field, a 32- or 64-byte UUID used to 
identify media files. UMIDs are usually a dumb number in their 32-byte form, 
but the extended form can encode a high-precision timestamp (with options for 
epoch and timescale) and geolocation information. Broadcast-WAVE files 
conforming to 
.B "EBU 3285 v2"
have a SMPTE UMID embedded in the 
.I bext 
chunk.
.SS Audio Definition Model 
.TP 
.B ITU Recommendation BS.2076-2-2019 \- Audio definition model. ITU, 2019.
Defines the Audio Definition Model, entities, relationships and properties. If
you ever had any questions about how ADM works, this is where you would start.
.SS iXML Metadata 
.TP 
.B iXML Specification v3.01. Gallery Software, 2021.
iXML is a standard for embedding mostly human-created metadata into WAVE files,
and mostly with an emphasis on location sound recorders used on film and 
television productions. Frustratingly the developer has never published a DTD 
or schema validation or strict formal standard, and encourages vendors to just
do whatever, but most of the heavily-traveled metadata fields are standardized.
