.TH wavinfo 1 "2023-11-07" "Jamie Hardt" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME 
wavinfo \- probe wave files for metadata
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY wavinfo
.I "[\-\-adm]"
.I "[\-\-ixml]"
.I FILE ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wavinfo 
extracts embedded metadata from WAVE and RF64/WAVE sound files, with an
emphasis on film, video and professional music production metadata.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "(no options)"
With no options, 
.B wavinfo 
will emit a JSON (Javascript Object Notation) object containing all 
detected metadata.
.IP "\-\-adm"
Output any Audio Definition Model (ADM) metadata in 
.BR FILE .
.IP "\-\-ixml"
Output any iXML metdata in 
.BR FILE .
.IP "\-h, \-\-help"
Print brief help.
.SH DETAILED DESCRIPTION
.B wavinfo 
collects metadata according to different 
.IR scopes .
.SS METADATA SCOPES
.IP fmt
Basic audio properties: sample format, sample rate, channel count, etc.
.IP data
Size and frame count of the WAVE file's 
.I data 
segment.
.IP cues
Timed cue points, labels, notes and time ranges.
.IP bext 
Broadcast-WAV metadata: description, originator, date and time, UMID.
.IP ixml 
A selection of parsed iXML fields: track list, project, scene, take, tape,
family name, family uid. For the full iXML document use the 
.IR \-\-ixml 
command option.
.IP adm 
EBU Audio Definition Model (ADM) metadata: Programme, channels. For the full 
ADM 
.I <axml>
document use the 
.IR \-\-adm 
command option.
.IP dolby
Dolby bitstream and Atmos metadata.
.IP info 
INFO metadata fields: IART (artist), ICMT (comment), etc.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.IP 0
On user quit.
.SH AUTHOR
Jamie Hardt 
.UR https://github.com/iluvcapra
.UE
.SH BUGS
Issue submissions, feature requests, pull requests and other contributions 
are welcome and should be directed at 
.BR wavinfo 's
home page on GitHub:
.RS 4
.UR https://github.com/iluvcapra/wavinfo 
.UE
.\" .SH SEE ALSO
.\" .BR "ffmpeg" "(1),"
